>> For the millions of Americans
suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder, there
may finally be a solution.
A late-stage clinical trial
of the psychedelic drug MDMA
has shown great promise
in treating the condition,
making FDA approval likely
in the next few years.
This is "Gaia News."
MDMA, an illegal drug commonly
known as Ecstasy or Molly,
started out as a synthetic
compound created in 1912.
After a period of use in the
treatment of mental health
conditions, it escaped in
the 1980s from the clinic
to the dance floor and was
criminalized by the FDA.
But a few proponents continued
to push for research,
including Dr. Rick Doblin, who
founded the Multidisciplinary
Association for Psychedelic
Studies, or MAPS.
Decades later, their efforts
finally led to a green light
from the FDA for clinical study.
Since then, there have been
three rigorous clinical trials,
which have all shown
enormous promise of the drug,
in combination with
psychotherapy, to treat PTSD.
>> Typically people have a
traumatic event that ends up
being very difficult for the
person to process in the normal
way.
Over time, those
walls and barriers
that people build up
to protect themselves
can interfere with
their ability to have
lasting, interpersonal
relationships, trust
other people.
And they may have
severe symptoms
of depression and anxiety.
>> Scott Ostrom is
a former US Marine,
who has suffered from severe
combat PTSD since he returned
from his second Iraq
deployment in 2007.
>> I was having
horrible nightmares.
I wasn't getting great sleep.
I would cry,
especially if I drank.
I thought about
suicide very often.
I went and saw a
psychiatrist at that same VA,
and we tried
different medications
to help me stabilize.
And honestly, none
of them worked.
They had crazy side effects.
I just gave up on them.
I felt myself falling apart.
Like I'd be getting into fights.
I was having a difficult time
keeping my hands in my pockets,
so to say.
>> Scott took part in the
latest phase III trial,
which showed that MDMA
assisted psychotherapy,
reduced the severity
of PTSD symptoms in 67%
of participants, to the point
that they no longer qualified
for the diagnosis.
Just how does MDMA do this?
>> My lab has
discovered that MDMA--
what it does at the level
of synapses and circuits
and behavior is,
it reopens what's
called a critical period
of social reward learning,
by enabling people to open up
again in their social learning
capacities and revisit
these traumatic memories,
for example, and
reconfigure some
of those memories around
their social behaviors.
>> What is particularly powerful
about the trial findings is
that MDMA exerted a profound
and lasting effect in just three
sessions.
During the several month
course of Scott's treatment,
he was able to access a part of
himself he calls "the bully."
This alter ego was formed
during his time in combat
as a means of self-protection,
but led to suffering afterwards
when he no longer needed it.
>> Through the guidance
of these two clinicians,
I was able to go all the way
back to the point where I
became that person, where
that switch happened.
The light switch
came off, and then
the new bully switch came on,
and I became this other person.
And this is within the first
hour and a half, two hours,
of our first MDMA session.
And so Scott disconnected
from me, my consciousness,
and went out and had a
conversation with the bully.
And they talked, and Scott
basically got permission
to take over for a while.
It's been almost two years
since that third session,
and I would still say
that it's very true,
that Scott has taken over.
>> Marcela Ot'alora is
a psychologist and lead
investigator for the phase
III clinical trials for MAPS.
>> MDMA-- it lends itself
to have this protective net
for somebody
working with trauma.
So there's a sense
of self-trust,
and there's also a
sense of opening up
to who they truly are.
in addition to the wounded part.
In addition to the
trauma, who are they?
And that becomes a resource.
So the beauty is that we're
offering something that is not
a pill that you take every day.
You're doing this three times,
and then you're integrating,
and you're continuing to
work on all the pieces
that you learned.
It's about-- these
are my symptoms.
They can be really
difficult and challenging,
and I know how to
work with them.
>> For Scott, the therapy
changed everything.
>> I got rid of things
that weren't good for me.
I haven't had one nightmare
since the MDMA session, which
is amazing because I had
them for over a decade.
Those episodes of
violence are gone.
Like, I don't get into fights.
We set out for a goal, which
was to treat my combat PTSD,
and that worked.
>> Many researchers now
feel that MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy is
effectively a cure for PTSD.
>> The results that people
are seeing in this trial that
we're talking about are
dramatic improvements that,
after a single or sometimes
two, sometimes three,
doses of MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy,
patients are seeing remarkable
reduction in PTSD symptoms
and effectively a cure.
>> For clinicians like
Marcela Ot'alora, FDA approval
can't come soon enough.
>> Our thought is that by 2023
we can have MDMA be a treatment
for PTSD.
So what that means
is that there will
be clinics around
the United States
and the world that are
MDMA-assisted therapy
clinics, where people can go and
get this treatment without it
being a study.
>> FDA approval would not only
open the door to treatment
for all those
suffering from PTSD,
but may also pave the way
for clinical studies of other
psychedelic therapies.
Many in the field
feel the time is
ripe for this revolution
in mental health.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."